[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, I've been reflecting on this year.
It's been a busy year. Yeah, go on.
>> In fact, we're recording this. We're on
yet another trip.
>> I know.
>> We're in Huntington Beach for this
year's Future Proof Conference, which is
>> always a fun time.
>> An event I always enjoy, but we have
been on the road a lot.
>> We have.
>> And I feel like the entire year is
starting to feel very surreal for me. It
feels just very different to prior years
for many different reasons. But I was
also thinking one of those reasons is
because
>> it seems harder and harder to do
portfolio construction nowadays. And I
know that sounds really weird given that
like markets are still at record highs
and everything seems to be going
reasonably well even though we had that
terrible jobs number. But if I think
back to the big leg down that we saw
this year,
>> it seemed really scary because basically
everything sold off at once, right?
>> You know what I really like? I like how
you started this with this philosophical
thing. It's like we're out on the road
and all this
>> and then I was like, how do I protect my
portfolio? and reflecting and the
surality of the times and now we bring
it around to portfolio construction but
no there's true and there's two a couple
things going on so one is the sort of
like cross asset class moves the other
thing is and it's very related to that I
mean it's the flip side of this which is
correlation breakdown and then there is
still this other element that I think is
at play where at least like
>> I would say there's two more things
which is that one within US assets the
winners are still the winners right
especially a lot of these big tech names
so you haven't gotten the sort secular
>> and people have been talking about
overvaluations for ages,
>> forever.
>> And then the fact that, you know, you're
not getting paid much to take on
volatility risk or volatility measures
are still very low. So there's a lot of
difficult unintuitive things going on
>> and I don't even know what a tail risk
hedge actually looks like at this point
because I would have thought like well
obviously maybe you diversify into
longduration bonds or something like
that but then in April when we had the
big sell-off long duration did not do
that well either. So, it kind of has me
scratching my head about if you were
worried about stuff both literally and
figuratively perhaps blowing up at this
point in time. What would you be doing?
Like what does a tail risk hedge
actually look like nowadays?
>> You like buy gold? That's already a
record high. So, yeah, it's confusing.
>> Yes. Okay. So, on that note, I'm very
happy to say we actually have the
perfect guest to talk about tail risk
insurance and just tail risks in
general. someone who's been working on
Wall Street for a really, really long
time and has a very storied career. Lots
of stories involving big names that you
and I would definitely recognize. We're
going to be speaking with Veneer Benali.
He is of course the founder of a
longtail alpha and again has worked at
many, many firms previously. We'll get
into all of that. Veneer, thank you so
much for coming on Hot Thoughts.
>> Thank you for having me. So I should
just go ahead and ask you to give a sort
of fiveinut summary of your career
because it is kind of amazing. But the
important thing is you didn't start out
as a trader. You started out as a
mathematician.
>> Yep. I started out as a theoretical
physicist. I was finishing my PhD at
Harvard and this is 1991. The recession
had just hit. I didn't know what a
recession was. I wanted to be a
professor. But my job evaporated because
I was going to go work at the super
colliders the superconducting super
collider that got cancelled by Congress
1990s.
>> I had a postoc lined up in France and
one I think it was in Texas in Austin
>> and I got a call out of Wall Street out
of Goldman. They were looking for quants
like me to work on options trading or
options model building rather I should
say. So I went and interviewed mostly
because it was a free trip to New York.
So I went there, got interviewed by an
elderly gentleman who was taking notes
saying doesn't know any finance. Full
disclosure, I knew no finance. I had no
interest in it. It was Fisher Black who
was interviewing me.
>> Oh wow.
>> I decided, you know, Black Scholes fame.
Little did I know when I turned that job
down from Goldman, I took another job at
City Bank trading derivatives cuz in my
mind it was a sabbatical. I was going to
do this for about 6 months to a year and
then go back to physics.
>> Mh. Well, little did I know that my
whole life would become basically very
deeply connected with option trading.
So, that's what I've been doing. And
we'll talk a lot more about Taylor
sketching in a second.
>> Wait, I got to ask why did you decide to
turn down Goldman given that Fischer
Black himself was doing the interview
and you chose to go to City at that
time? Well, one was a research job at
Goldman and the job at city was actually
trading derivatives and uh since trading
was so far away from what I knew and
this was really supposed to be a
vacation for me for about a year like
sound like a good thing to do or fun
thing to do rather.
>> Did you ever feel like I'm always so
curious about stories from the early
days of physicists going to Wall Street
was there a period where you felt like
it was a bit bene I mean you call it
kind of a vacation job. Did it feel
intellectually beneath you for a while
and then did it eventually become sort
of genuinely intellectually satisfying
in the way that maybe you had
anticipated an academic career to
become?
>> So interesting. So the modeling
certainly at those days seemed a little
too naive. So for instance, I'll give
you an example. Very first trade that we
did large trade I was bank at the time
and it was an interest rate cap on yen
interest rates linked to the dollar yen.
So it was basically a two-factor option
called a hybrid option. And it turned
out that as a physicist I was very easy.
It was very easy for me and I was very
able to write a Monte Carlo to write
this knockout cap. But for the finance
people it was kind of tough. So the math
was very easy.
>> But I also learned that trading is not
just math. Trading is a lot of
behavioral stuff and so on. And that I
just obviously had to learn. And I have
some great stories of stuff that I did
really badly back in 199094.
>> Tell us the story about something you
did badly.
>> Well, to 1994, if you remember, you
know, 1993, the Fed had eased and rates
were quite low and everybody was long
the front end of the yield curve and
buying EUR dollar futures contracts.
>> Wait, didn't a town around here go
bankrupt?
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. We'll get to that.
Exactly. So, February of 1994, the Fed
raised rates by 25. And then very
surprisingly April 18th of that year
they did an intermeating increase and at
that time bond market really sold off
quite a bit and I just did what human
beings do which is bet on mean
reversion. And so I tried to buy the
bond market and tried to buy the bond
market again and again and again until I
realized that there's something called
trend following and exit and I think the
bond market sold off a good 15 20 points
and finally I recouped it all but it was
a brutal few months of literally getting
my face ripped off. So one other thing
I'm curious about the sort of early days
of quants but what exactly was the pitch
to scientists whether they're you know
mathematicians or physics guys when
these big banks or big trading firms are
trying to recruit back then because you
know like quant was in the I know we had
1987 by then but it was still relatively
in the early days so I'm really curious
like what they told you about what you
would be doing. So in the from the
modeling side it's pretty
straightforward right the black shields
equation and stochastic calculus
stoastic finance is basically what's
called the heat equation or the
diffusion equation in physics and that's
something that every physicist learns
when they're in early graduate school.
It's like solving a partial differential
equation. So the math is exactly
identical the math of finance. And maybe
that's a problem actually in in
retrospect now that having done this for
30 years and 30 plus years and survived
maybe that's a problem because the
beauty can somehow hide the frictions
that are underneath it.
>> From the trading side when I first
started trading I think it was very
simply being mathematically sharp and
quick uh and being able to answer
quizzes just made interviewers feel like
they were getting smart people on the
desk that they could train, right? The
blank canvas so to speak.
>> Yeah. So once people on these desks got
armed with PhD physicists and
understanding of like Brownian motion
and stuff like that, did that change how
the actual markets traded from your
perspective? Like sort of pre and post
that did assets conform more to as
models anticipated because of the model
effect on them like what was your
observation of actual existing market
behavior pre and post the physics
revolution?
>> Oh, absolutely. And this is a very
important question because if you fast
forward to 2018, the big XIV debacle and
the Volmageddon and a lot of things that
happen now and actually fundamentally
what we do now, what I do now is related
to this fact that there's a very tight
feedback loop between models and markets
and models. So give you a very simple
example, right? If you have an option
that you've sold to somebody and you
have to manage the risk, of course, when
you sell the option, you're getting a
volatility premium. That's why you sell
it. You're getting an insurance premium,
so to speak. But then to manage the
position you have to delta hedge. But
delta hedging means that you have to buy
and sell the underlying asset and some
higher order Greeks as well. Gamma,
Vega, theta that you've all read about.
But delta hedging requires people to be
able to buy and sell so that they are
the seller. The market maker is locally
flat of course. So the market maker
that's what you do and that's how you
earn your keep earn your fees so to
speak. The problem is that there's an
idealization in mathematics or
mathematical finance that you can do
this at an unlimited size and size
doesn't matter but it matters. Liquidity
is actually not there. The basic
assumption of black shores is that you
can continuously trade with almost zero
transactions costs. Well, that's just
not true in real markets. As a matter of
fact, in the last maybe two years even,
you've seen liquidity in the E- mini
futures contracts, which are possibly
the I would say the zeroth order hedging
instrument for the equity markets go
down relative to the high levels
frequently go down to maybe 120th or
150th of it level. So people just can't
get out. So what happens is that people
sell options then they start delta
hedging. Delta hedging results in the
options market reacting to the delta
then results in new hedges coming in. So
this feedback loop gets tighter and
tighter and tighter until something
breaks. And when something breaks and
the bot shut down, which is today's
environment,
>> you actually have no liquidity. And
that's when you get these crashes like
Liberation Day on April 2nd.
>> Volageddon was definitely one of the
more weirder events in markets because
everyone could see what was going to
happen when the VIX curve actually
inverted. like you could see that all
these products were going to go
absolutely belly up and no one no one
seemed to react to it until it was like
much too late. That reminds me. So, one
of the reasons that we are interviewing
you here in Huntington Beach is because
you used to work at Pimco with Bill
Gross. And the last time we spoke to
Bill Gross, I think was actually at
Huntington Beach two years ago. And one
of the things we spoke to him about was
volatility selling.
>> And Bill kind of became the poster child
for a little bit of volatility selling
at least in the bond market in the sort
of like guess it would have been 2015
around then, mid sort of 2010s area. I'm
really curious who's selling V now and
how has it changed over the course of
your career?
>> Yeah, so great uh little side point
there. So Bill and I've been great
friends as a matter of fact I went to
Pimco because I heard Bill speak at a
talk when he was advertising in book
back in 2000 and Bill's an amazing
genius, great investor. And one of the
best compliments I got recently, I was
communicating with him and he said, "I
have your paper at the top of my reading
list." And I said, "Which paper, Bill?"
and he said this paper that I wrote with
Larry Harris on the volatility selling
ecosystem that basically you grew up
before 2018. So yes, so Bill actually in
in a sense invented this whole idea of
selling volatility in fixed income
especially through buying mortgages or
explicit selling of straddles and
strangles. And what we realized and
again I was head of analytics at Pimco.
over the last over 15 years or so I was
there I got to see and help him manage
the quantitative risks of those
portfolios. We ended up educating a lot
of our clients at that time about
volatility selling harvesting vault
premiums and so on which did end up
adding quite a bit of as Bill calls it
structural alpha to the PIMCO portfolios
and you know 20 30 40 basis points every
year. What happened is that everybody
got educated and it became part of the
academic lore and everybody realized it.
There was a lot of crowding and it's a
little bit like selling insurance right
so when you find that one insurance
policy selling works then you say why
don't become multi-line insurance
provider so you start selling insurance
policy on everything and so what has
happened now over my career it have gone
from institutional selling where first
it was hedge funds then it was large
sophisticated mutual funds like pimco
who could actually still fit it inside
of the mutual fund complex because
selling naked options is not really
allowed unless you cash back it,
>> right?
>> And then over time it has now gone to
all the do-it-yourselfers.
So all the wealth offices and family
offices and large endowments and this
whole area what's uh which is now called
alternative risk premiums is based on
this idea
>> that you can go and sell volatility in
various forms explicit forms or implicit
forms
>> to generate income. So everybody's doing
it.
>> Yeah, that's the answer. everyone even
more people are doing. So when we see
alternative risk premia it's basically a
wall selling overlay is that it
>> yeah I mean you can make it more or less
sophisticated I mean it's a little bit
naive to say it's only wall selling but
wall selling is a very important
component of it and there were some
great papers by people from AQR who took
every asset class so equities bonds
credit foreign exchange and then also
sliced it down in various types of
strategy style and quality and momentum
and so on they made like a 16x6 matrix
and then they recreated did this what I
consider to be more sophisticated
sounding
>> ball selling but it really is false
selling and what people do just to to be
very clear is it's not just ball selling
they also layer on other things like
trend following on top of it
>> to create a counterbalance to the ball
selling because trend following is
naturally
>> a ball liking or ball long ball type of
strategy
[Music]
going back to I hadn't realized that
about the declining or the collapsing
liquidity within the e- mini futures but
is there some sort of I don't know law
of thermodynamics or something I don't
know if that's the term or that's the
analogy in markets where such that when
some instrument becomes the hedging
instrument of choice, the more popular
that gets, the less capacity there is
for liquidity in that instrument. Is
that sort of what's going on here?
>> Yeah. So, in this case, the e- mini
futures contract are basically a
speculation vehicle. They're a cash
equization vehicle. So, they serve a lot
of different purposes. But I think the
biggest thing that's going on here
>> is that starting maybe about 10 years
ago and somewhat surreptitiously, the
market morphed from human market makers.
So, when I started trading, it was human
market makers. I still remember when I
was, you know, in the 1990s, Tommy
Baldwin on the pit of the CBOT floor,
Chicago border trade floor, you know,
you would do a trade and Tommy Baldwin
and he was legendary. Obviously, he
would lift his hand up and the market
would stop and turn and go the other
way. Human humans could do that. Yeah,
what has happened surficially or you
know very strangely over the last 15 or
10 years maybe is that the human beings
have sort of left this market making
area and 90 plus% is being made by bots
and what bots know very well self-s
survival is extremely important to them
is as soon as they see a liquidity title
wave coming tsunami coming at them they
just get out of the way the liquidity
just becomes very episodic and Muhammad
Alaran used to call it latent illquidity
which is just the fixture of the markets
today. It looks liquid
>> and when you don't need it, it's there
but if you need it, it's not there.
>> So how do you actually deal with that as
a trader?
>> Yeah. So as a trader, so this comes back
to the role of options fundamentally,
right? So what do options I mean in the
world of quantitative finance, you can
take an option, you can replicate it by
doing delta hedging and so on. Basically
looking at the partial derivatives of an
option pricing equation or you can say
I'll just buy the option. So an option
is a contractual agreement between you
and the option provider. So if there's
ill liquidity and you believe this is a
fixture of the environment that we're
going to live in, then there is no other
way than to actually have a contractual
agreement with somebody
>> where you're delegating the uh
illquidity risk to them and so you are
buying it
>> when the premium is cheaper. But trying
to delta hedge it yourself is like
literally trying to you know put an
elephant through the eye of a needle.
There's just people just cannot work
out. I mean, I just can't
>> I just can't imagine the market
collectively trying to get through that
needle these days.
>> There is just nothing there. Let's talk
about April for a second and maybe that
period like between April 2nd and April
9th because that was a a market event
for sure and it was also a real economic
event with many things going on that
weren't just lines on a chart etc. and
we know what sort of happened there with
the tariffs and then the reversal of
some of the tariffs and what so forth.
Since then, we've seen some of these
correlation breakdowns that some of our
previous guests have talked about. From
your perspective, you know, whether it's
April 2nd through April 9th or April 2nd
through now, what happened then such
that maybe some maybe is it a new
regime? What changed in that month? Yeah
though I think one of the things that is
going on is we are slowly undergoing a
regime shift and I like to always paint
this picture and I'll come to your
question right after I give you this big
macro picture from the 60s to the 80s
60s to the mid 80s you had this period
of rising inflation rising volatility
noncredible central banks and stuff was
kind of breaking and people were behind
the curve then you had the bulker
increase of interest rates starting in
the 1980s and until the maybe late 20s
2020 call it 2021 on covid was an
accelerant you got negative yields and
falling volatility credible central
banks and so on and I think we've
actually turned the corner again so
starting in 202021 I think we are
probably going to look more like the 60s
to 80 than 1987 to 2020 now having put
that backdrop you know in in front of us
I think the issue really comes back to
yes there is a regime shift both in
terms of people's response function and
how quickly things happen. So one data
point that I can relay is since I
started trading is in the past when
crisis were would happen even including
the GFC which I lived through and you
know did fairly well it used to take
months maybe weeks for things to correct
and you had time to plan and time to
execute. Then Volmageddon maybe took a
few days. 2020 COVID it maybe happened
in you know few days to few hours and
then starting this year it feels like
things are actually happening on an
hourly to maybe minute basis. For
instance in April when the you know big
crash happened and the correction
happened all the action including some
of our trading happened in the pre- pre
pre-market. So the markets had not even
opened up and if you needed to do
something you had to do it during the
night session because that's where all
the action was. So I think that's one
fixture what's going on right now is
that stuff is happening much faster and
it does feel like the balance is tilted
in the favor of more automated trading
rather than human-driven trading. Let me
ask a philosophical question about tail
risk projection, which is whenever
there's a blow up, we suddenly get all
these stories about tail risk funds that
have done phenomenally well out of last
month's chaos or whatever it might be.
And then no one talks about them for
like the next three years.
>> You don't know how they're bleeding you
dry during those other months, right?
>> That's right. Um until we get another
blow up and then the cycle repeats
itself. In your mind, what is the
purpose of tail risk protection? Yeah,
this is very simple and I've been trying
to do this. This is actually one of my
mission since I started our firm is not
just managing the risk but also trying
to educate people on what the purpose
is. The purpose is very similar to
insurance and not everybody needs it. If
you don't live in California earthquake
prone zone or in Florida hurricane prone
zone, you don't need the insurance. But
if you're going to run a large
equityheavy portfolio, and by the way,
equities have demonstrated over the last
100 years and maybe going forward are
the one way to create long-term wealth
because people go to work. The first
thing I learned when I was at City Bank
from my boss told me was just look at
log GDP versus log S&P. The charts are
aligned. Basically, if people work, the
market goes up. So, what that means is
that you need to be invested in the
stock market. And the more you invest in
the stock market, the more likely it is
that you're going to make higher
compounded returns over time. But also,
you will suffer big draw downs. And one
of the biggest problems with people's
behavioral function is that when the
markets collapse, they forget their
plans and they liquidate. Right? So what
tail risk fundamentally does, it's not a
fund that you should look in isolation
and say, is this fund a good performer
or not? Just like you would not go back
home and say, "Well, what the what was
the total return on my home insurance
policy?"
>> Right? It's just a positive negative
100%. Right? Every single year. So,
would you quit buying insurance? You
won't because home insurance or car
insurance is not an investment. It is
the cost of doing business. So that's
the context in which one should think
about tail risk hedging is it allows you
to first protect yourself from yourself
in the bad events and then secondly when
the markets are down
>> the value of those hedges going up
allows you to buy assets on the sheep
which results in compounded growth.
>> Why hasn't Wall Street created an
instrument where you could sell away
your liquidity to protect you from
yourself automatically? I'm going to
invest in this fund and I cannot sell
until the year60.
>> Isn't that called lockups?
>> But do those funds actually exist? Could
I buy that? And then there's two things
that intuitively seem that A you protect
yourself from yourself. B, you diversify
automatically by the fact that you're
across time and then C presumably that
would be more stable for securities
lending and collect the little
instrument. Has Wall Street created a
fund that one can't get out of? I think
like Tracy just mentioned uh hedge funds
like to have lockups and and this
>> I just I should just be able to buy an
ETF that I can't sell.
>> Yeah. Uh I think the if you can get over
the regulators I think that we are
living in a world where Marktomarket
daily NAV etc for ETFs and full
transparency is required. But I do think
I mean one one very sophisticated
institutional investor who was a client
of ours actually said I would pay you
more if you sold me a product that
actually had a longer lock. because this
is a question I have about portfolios
and diversification in general and it
goes back to the point that you made
about how stocks have done very well and
the expectation is that as long as the
economy grows stocks will continue to do
well for a while 6040 was a craze right
and this was a good portfolio of your
treasuries and your stocks balance out
but why should like what is the case for
diversification let's say setting aside
the behavioral fact that people sell at
the lows
What is the case for diversification
when there is this asset class that does
so well over time?
>> Yeah, so this is great. So if you could
guarantee that this asset class would
keep growing always then you would 100%
be on stock only.
>> Now what bonds traditionally used to do
was they provided you with income that
when the stock market wasn't doing well
at least you wouldn't go completely
broke because you would have some yield.
>> But I think it got taken to an extreme
right. I mean the greatest example and I
wrote a whole book on this topic is is
the European Central Bank followed the
Japanese central bank and then they
started buying at negative yields and
they convinced all the indexers to keep
buying bonds with them. Right? I mean
think about this. You were buying bonds
meaning you were lending somebody money
and you were paying them interest
>> and at that point diversification is an
insult. I mean you don't want to buy a
negatively yielding bond along with
stocks because it does nothing for you.
And we're living the consequences of it
today because the bond market over the
last five or seven or 10 years even has
had absolutely dismal zero returns.
>> Joe, do you think people who want
positive yielding bonds are entitled
still? That was your position for a
whole year.
>> I still think that I still don't think
anyone is entitled to yield.
>> No, I don't. If you want to take the
risk, go get it. But the sort of moral
demands that the government must provide
you yield for what? For not spending and
doing anything. Give me a break. Joe Joe
spent a good year making fun of yield
bugs as you call them.
>> I don't It's great. Go out, collect your
yield. I'm I'm happy for you, but don't
pretend that it's some sort of moral
insult that the government isn't
providing you risk-free yield. That is
my only That is my only stamp.
>> That's I would argue the US government's
most important role. Anyway, let's go
back for a second. So, it's not just the
insurance idea. you touched on this, but
it's also the idea that like you can get
a massive windfall when there's a market
crash and then you can use that money to
actually go on a buying spree at a time
when markets are cheap and everyone else
is, you know, short on cash and they
can't do the same. How do you actually
deploy that into practice and how do you
scale for instance an expected windfall
against the type of assets that you
could potentially buy?
>> Yeah, I think this this is where the
first principles thinking becomes really
important. So you have to look at every
portfolio is different, right? So one of
the other mistakes I think people make
is they think you can just pick up a
finance 101 book and say every portfolio
is identical. It's all risk neutral and
everybody is exactly the same. It's just
not the case. Public fund that has a 40%
or 50% funded ratio is very different
than a 90% or a you know bank that's
120% fully funded. Right? So everybody
has different needs. The first thing
that you do is you look at the
underlying portfolio's posture. How much
loss can you take? look at the systemic
risk shocks that they can actually
withstand. So you run a shock, you run a
full distribution analysis and figure
out what is the outcome under which they
will be under so much distress or so
much duress that they might end up
having to liquidate assets. And there
are actually quite a few like that right
now where if the stock market went down
20%. And privates went down about 20%.
>> In order to raise liquidity for
distribution, they would have to
actually sell seed corn, right? So it's
really really bad. So that's an
existential risk that you want to
quantify. So the first thing that you do
is you figure out what that risk is. A
full distribution of outcomes and then
you look at the instrument set that's
out there in the marketplace starting
from the most reliable and surprisingly
enough like Joe mentioned already the
cheapest one which is equity option
volatility. M
>> you can buy those put options but people
who are not willing to pay a lot of
continuous premium you can do more
sophisticated tricks where you can buy
indirect hedges for instance credit
default swaps today the CDX index if you
don't see the charts it's actually
tighter than it was pre the GFC it's the
tightest it's ever been
>> because people are buying it for
cosmetic yield reasons so there are a
lot of derivative inst cosmetic yield
simply means that the total yield if you
look at the yield of a corporate bond
today.
>> It is basically treasury yield plus some
spreads. So the treasury yields are at
call it 4 and a half 4%.
>> But the spreads are actually very tight
only 50 basis points on the CDX. So
you're getting a 5% 6% yield
>> which in the context of where we were 3
years ago looks like an
issue.
You are taking much risk.
>> Okay, keep going.
>> Yeah, it's a cosmetic yield. Your
decorated yield. So to me the yield is
not justified by the risks that are
underlyed. So there's various
instruments that you can use and create
a portfolio of these types of hedges.
[Music]
Is tailor risk hedging like insurance
from a business from a structure of how
people buy it? Is it like insurance
where people sort of reload every year
in a sort of okay start of the new year
what is the tail risk I want to put on
etc or something that renews and they
have to keep paying a fee or is it just
sort of something that can be set it and
forget it a permanent allocation that
sort of the tail risk hedge like talk to
us about the business of selling a tail
risk hedge
>> yeah so definitely so it goes up to the
highest level where this becomes part of
where you guys started portfolio
construction it's an asset allocation
decision Yeah,
>> it's not a trade. So the context has to
be that if the agents are all lined up,
meaning boards and trustees and so on,
they think of this decision as
protecting the portfolio, making a more
robust portfolio as part of the DNA and
the tail becomes part of the how you
rebalance your portfolio over the long
term. Okay. So that's how you set up the
strategic portfolio. But then to your
point, every year, yes, you have to
renew this policy. You re have to
recommmit premiums. Now you can preund
for the next 5 years if you wanted to
>> but because options decay
>> in order to have this reliable hedge you
sort of have to uh buy new options.
>> Yes.
>> What would be the worst kind of tail
risk hedging in your view? Is it you
know too expensive or does it not
actually work when there is a big market
crash? Like what is the ultimate sin of
a tail risk strategy?
>> Ultimate sin absolutely is the one which
promises to work but doesn't work.
Right. So a lot of people try to reduce
your cost by creating synthetic
strategies, right? I already mentioned
futures markets aren't very deep when
you need them, but there's a lot of
strategies which actually use a futures
replication strategy
>> like the 1987 crash also purported to
do. And those strategies typically don't
work. And so there's many that promise
and they look like they are cheaper and
they don't cost any bleed but they also
do not deliver which again going back to
April 2nd the only thing that worked
during that April 2nd to April 8th
period was reliable hedging using index
options nothing duration didn't work
trend following didn't work a lot of
other altruis premium strategies didn't
work
>> so that is the cardinal sin you just do
not do not have the luxury to go to the
constituent and your clients or
whoever's bought it and said, you know,
we were trying to be too smart and oops,
it didn't work.
>> Yeah.
>> As you mentioned that to even talk about
buying a tail risk hedge, you have to
sort of understand is what is the
existential risk for the fund and
different funds have different flavors
of existential risk depending on how
funded they are. And so obviously an
entity that's 120% funded is going to
have very different risk scenarios than
one that's 40% funded. But you said
something interesting which is that and
I've been thinking about this a lot in a
different context which is how levered
is the financial system or the real
economy to an ongoing rise in the stock
market? How important is that? And at
what point does even a sideways stock
market, let alone a decline become risky
for something that could break? And you
know, we used to think credit is the
thing that breaks. But I wonder if it's
in the stock area thing now where you
really get the problem if the equity
values don't go up. Tell us more about
what you said about what happens to
various types of economically important
players. If the stock market one day
stops going up for uh sustained period
of time,
>> I think you have a big problem, right?
So, so not only is the stock the whole
system 401ks and public pensions,
they're all levered up to the stock
market because that's the only way you
can get to your 7 12 or 8% actual yield.
So, if the stock market doesn't keep
going up and keep delivering those kind
of returns, it's very hard to get to
that point. Maybe if inflation rises, at
least again cosmetically, maybe the long
bond gets up to 7% or 8%. And everybody
can just lock it in and immunize and
you're there.
>> But in real terms, you're not going to
have the income that you need 30 years
from now to retire.
>> I'm fine. I have a zer mortgage. So I I
have I have a mortgage that's locked in
from that one period of time.
>> Yeah, exactly. So the system is very
levered. And then corporate credit
clearly is very very concentrated. We
all read about payings and so on. But
corporate credit based on the merrenton
model again that connects equities
>> to corporate credit spreads is also
leveraged the stock market. that the
stock market suddenly had a big
sell-off, corporate credits widen out,
which is the real problem, right?
Because if corporate credit widens out
and the cost of borrowing goes up for
all the corporations, maybe not the fang
stocks, but the 493 other stocks, then
how does the system produce? Because our
whole system is based on borrowing. And
I don't think very many companies in the
US can function if your cost of
operating your business was 10% a year.
>> Okay. Okay. Well, on that note, we would
be remiss to have a tail risk person
here and not ask what's the big risk
that you see on the horizon in let's
just say the short to medium term.
>> I think for me the biggest risk right
now is uh what people have been talking
about is you know the so-called and I
call it so-called the Fed independence
paradigm shift because I don't believe
the Fed was ever really fully
independent but now it's coming to the
four that the fiscal and monetary
authorities are actually one. So what
happens in the aftermath if the Fed
actually becomes part of the central
government, the fiscal authorities, I
think at that point all bets are off
because that's the one anchor that
everybody whether uh realistically or
not has held on to. But if interest
rates can change just based on the need
to finance something that totally upside
downs the financial system. So to me
that's the single biggest risk right
now. So would that materialize into an
inflationary risk for instance and then
would you be focused on what you can do
to offset that?
>> Yeah, inflationary risk and I think one
of the best option trades again this is
not a direct option. So going back to
what you were asking before you don't
always just have to pay premium the
yield curve steepener where you buy the
short end of the yield curve and you
sell the long end of the yield curve.
Today you can do it through using swaps
and all that for essentially zero net
carry. So here's an option very similar
to shorting the negatively bond market
in Europe a few years ago where if you
put a yield curve steepener on
>> either in a hyperinflationary maybe not
hyper but a lot high inflationary
scenario or in an aggressive Fed cut the
yield curve steepens. So yes, so that
environment is an environment in which
the curve steepener could work. And yes,
my zeroth order prior forecast would be
that if we lose explicit independence of
the Fed, the yield curve actually
steepens a lot more.
>> Something I'm interested in. So, you
know, you were talking about the recent
eras and the the 60s and 80s and things
may have gotten a little unglued and
then the Vulkar era and then the
postcoid era and now this question about
whether what's left of Fed independence
is at risk. You know, you're a physicist
and or a lot of people in your space are
mathematicians. Is there a limit to how
much you can sort of math it out so to
speak? because a lot of these questions
are external to mathematics and so how
do you think about the limits of
quantitative analysis when we're dealing
with things like will the political
system allow the Federal Reserve to
remain independent? Yeah, I think a lot
of it is actually non-quantitative and
what I've learned even though I come
from a quantitative background, it's not
the math itself, but it's the sequence
of logical arguments that you can make
to get to a conclusion. Right? So for
instance, we knew even before fancy
mathematics was discovered uh you know
lrangeians and so on that gravity
exists. Gravity's existence has been
known before maybe math was invented but
gravity has been there and so I think
there's some central laws of finance
which will still continue to exist uh
regardless of the mathematical modeling
of them and you know the bill gross when
I used to work with him he used to say
some things we can take for granted I'm
paraphrasing it but the steepness of the
yield curve the fact that the yield
curve needs to be upward sloped for the
financial system to function because
people lend money in order to get
something in turn. Those are not
mathematical devices. Those are really
just the way the capitalist system
works. So I think you can take the
quantitative modeling to its own limit.
But there are certain things that have
happened in our system where we're at a
point now where gravity so to speak of
the financial markets are going to have
to take over.
>> But presumably also if you can't predict
the politics because it's very difficult
especially nowadays. If you can't
predict the politics then maybe right
sizing your positions becomes more
important. And so the maths actually
becomes one way of dealing with the very
uncertainty non-mmathematical element of
what's going on.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And I think to take that
point one step further. So correlation
has been the greatest gift since the 19
mid 80s to to 2020. Right. So you got
stocks and bonds just say 6040. Stocks
went up, bonds went up and they were
diversifying which is what a beautiful
place to be in. Right. It
>> sounds nice. So so that was a freebie.
And again this goes back to financial
gravity so to speak that state of
affairs that free lunch should not
exist. So I think we might be entering a
phase where stocks and bonds maybe are
actually not diversifying and you have
to look at other things. Gold of course
as you mentioned maybe Bitcoin who knows
but I think the fact that reliable
insurance or portfolio protection is so
available today using the options market
to me would be the place where I would
look. When you look at the long end of
the yield curve today in the US, is
there an element in which these concerns
about the loss of Fed independence are
being priced in right now? If suddenly
you could snap your finger and know for
a fact that the Fed will operate as it
has been for the last 20 years, for the
next 20 years, would there be a change?
Is there some margin that concern there?
You know what? I don't know if the Fed
is going to be a committed inflation
fighter as well as it has been in the
past. Therefore, I'm demanding extra
yield today.
>> No, not yet. I don't think so. Maybe a
slight amount of premium has gone up.
But one of the most striking features of
the system is that if you look at the
Treasury yields, look at the 30-year
bond today is 470. But you look at the
30-year interest rate swap, it's trading
at, believe it or not, 389, right? So,
it's almost 85 basis points under the US
Treasury. Now, you ask, why would
somebody take the uh swap market at a
lower yield? And I've been trading swaps
since its inception back in the 1990s.
Swap spreads are negative 85. And that
goes back to the receiving of interest
rate swaps to hedge liabilities by a lot
of large institutions. So they have
certainly not priced in inflationary
effects into the swap market.
>> But at some point this has to also
equiliiberate. So in my view it has not
been priced in. Maybe it's too early to
price in because maybe the Fed does not
lose its independence and you know rises
as phoenix from the ashes. But uh I'm a
little bit pessimistic about it.
>> Just going back to your storied career
on Wall Street for a second, how good
were you at playing Liars Poker?
>> I was actually pretty good. I uh think I
mean I learned it after I joined Solomon
Brothers was a good group of people and
I think the first year maybe I lost a
bit but I think in the third year that I
was there I won it and I was actually uh
I think the one who took the biggest
spot and I also my boss gave me his uh
18 ft fishing boat but he was buying a
new one as part of the settlement that I
knew.
>> Yeah in lie of cash. He was like here
take my own.
>> Well cash plus the boat I think. So yeah
>> that's a really big pot.
>> That was a big pot. Yeah. At that point,
we used to spend after the trading day
was over. Every day we would print out
randomized liars poker sheets. Uh,
usually about 24 or 30 of them, and we'd
play about 30 30 rounds every day.
>> Wait, Liars poker sheets. I thought you
played with actual cash.
>> Yeah. So, actual cash you play with
dollar bills, but uh, you know, if
you're playing 24 rounds, there are not
enough dollar bills flying around.
>> I never thought of that.
>> Yeah. So, you randomize based on how the
dollar bill numbers are generated. Yeah.
Is there going to be a future in finance
for a young physics student or a math
nerd in high school today? You know,
people worry about this with AI and so
forth, but a young person who's
quantitatively minded. Do you feel
confident that there will be a role for
them in finance in the future?
>> Absolutely. I think finance has existed
from the very very beginning because
it's based on the two fundamental
emotions, right? Greed and fear, right?
So as long as there's greed and fear and
there's smart people around uh and again
going back to math and physics it's not
so much that the toolkit itself is
teaching you anything special. It's just
it teaches you think in a discipline
logical fashion
>> and I think with tools like what we're
seeing with AI and so on and coding
becoming completely democratized. I
think the ability to ask important
questions rigorously becomes even more
important. So I think it's going to be
even better than it's been.
>> Veneer that was absolutely fantastic.
Thank you so much for spending time with
us at Huntington Beach at the Future
Proof Conference and that was great.
>> Yeah, thank you so much. That was
fantastic. Thanks for having me.
[Music]
>> Joe, that was really fun. We should have
an back and just do like stories from
Wall Street in the 1990s episode. We
could do that.
>> I love the stories. We could do a lot
more on the stories and I'm also
interested in like basically you know
the philosophy of portfolio
construction. I mean obviously there's
the math of portfolio construction but I
do have a certain dissatisfaction with
many conversations about portfolio
construction including this
>> in what sense?
>> Well diversified stocks have almost
always gone up. Has every insurance I
mean I guess another question that I
could could have asked is has every
insurance contract on the stock market
essentially so far been a waste in human
history because the stock market is at
all-time highs. I have I have questions
about that. The counterpoint to that is,
and I've I've come to realize this as I
get older in my life and in my
portfolio, is there is something nice
about like waking up during a sell-off
and going like, "Oh, shoot. My 401k has
been absolutely decimated today." But if
I look at, you know, some other position
or some other tail risk hedge that I
have, like that's actually up a little
bit and it's offset some of the pain.
And if I actually had to cash out of my
portfolio on that day because of
whatever I had to make a mortgage
payment or whatever, then I would have
some extra cash to spare. And you could
get an extra return by having that extra
cash available to you to then go into
the market and buy stuff on the cheap.
>> I think that we really should have an
odd lots ETF that is advertises its
illquidity that you can't sell this. If
you need cash now, this is not the
instrument for you. If you are putting
your money in this, don't expect to see
it again for 30 years. But the plus side
is it will keep you from making bad,
irrational decisions on a day when
everything is red.
>> I mean, there's there's a value in that.
There's a value in that. And there's
also a value in being able to, you know,
sleep at night a little easier because
you have different positions. But
anyway, should we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisel. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our guest Veneer
Bonsali. He's at LongTail Alpha. Follow
our producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman Dashel Bennett at Dashbot and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLotss, if you like
it when we talk about portfolio
construction, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
Yeah.
Hey.
[Music]